---
layout: page
title: Projects
permalink: /projects/
description: 
nav: true
nav_order: 3
display_categories: 
horizontal: false
---

<h4>Causal Impact of Poverty Reduction on Housing Conditions of Low-Income, U.S. Families: Evidence from Baby's First Years </h4>
*This is joint work with the [Baby's First Years](https://www.babysfirstyears.com/) study PIs: Lisa Gennetian, Katherine Magnuson, Kimberly Noble, Greg Duncan, Nathan Fox, Sarah Halpern-Meekin, and Hirokazu Yoshikawa*

**Abstract:** Early housing environments are critical for children’s healthy development, yet a worsening housing affordability crisis and insufficient housing supports has left millions of low-income families with children unable to find safe, affordable rental housing. With increase interest in guaranteed income programs and unconditional cash support, understanding whether direct cash assistance can improve housing outcomes of low-income children represents an important policy question. This paper evaluates the impact of an unconditional cash transfer on housing conditions for low-income families with young children using data from the Baby’s First Years randomized control trial. 1000 low-income mothers were recruited in maternity wards between May 2018 and June 2019 shortly after giving birth to their infants and randomized into a high-cash ($333 per month; 40% of all mothers) or low-cash gift group ($20 per month; 60% of all mothers). Using data from the Age 1, 2, and 3 survey, we find no impacts of the high-cash gift on likelihood of mothers experiencing evictions or homelessness, but some indication that high-cash gift mothers had lower levels of residential mobility during the first three years and lower levels of excessive mobility at age 3.  The high-cash gift mothers were also less likely to have ever received housing assistance and may have been more likely to own a home at age 1 and age 2. At age 3, mothers had a decreased likelihood of being cost burdened (>30% of income toward rent) and severely cost burdened (>50% of income toward rent). Mothers in the high-cash gift group were also less likely to ever live in a doubled-up (living with an adult who is not a partner) or multigenerational household between birth and age 3. We find no statistically significant differences in survey reports of housing quality. 


<h4> Interactive Mobile Support for Lady Health Workers Promoting Breastfeeding </h4>
*with Erica Field, Nicola Singletary, and Kate Vyborny*

**Abstract:** Breastfeeding is critical for infant health, particularly in poor settings, as it ensures infants receive key nutrients and protects infants from lethal water-borne infections such as diarrheal disease and pneumonia. Worldwide, adoption of WHO-recommended breastfeeding practices could avert over 820,000 infant deaths annually, which include: (1) early initiation (< 1 hour after birth), (2) exclusive breastfeeding for the first 6 months, and (3) continued breastfeeding with appropriate complementary foods for > 2 years. Collaborating with UNICEF and the Government of Punjab, we will conduct a randomized evaluation of an innovative mobile health app designed to support the promotion of WHO-recommended breastfeeding practices by Pakistan’s Lady Health Workers. Using variation in breastfeeding behavior induced by the intervention, we will quantify the causal effect of breastfeeding on infant and maternal health outcomes. Innovative sub-experiments will also allow us to estimate the impact of measurement error on the relationship between breastfeeding and health outcomes. 

This project is being implemented by the [Centre for Economic Research in Pakistan (CERP)](https://www.cerp.org.pk/) and has been funded by [USAID DIV](https://www.usaid.gov/div), [The Weiss Fund](https://bfi.uchicago.edu/the-weiss-fund/), and the [Fund for Innovation in Development (FID)](https://fundinnovation.dev/en/projects/supporting-breastfeeding-in-pakistan-through-a-mobile-application). 

<h4> Evaluating the impact of community health workers on maternal and child health outcomes: Evidence from a natural experiment </h4>
*with Erica Field and Kate Vyborny*
**Abstract:** Community Health Workers (CHWs) are uniquely positioned to reduce maternal and child health disparities in developing countries. Over 4 million CHWs worldwide provide health services to millions of households, with many programs focusing specifically on maternal and child health (Schneider et al. 2016; WHO, 2023). However, despite the wide reach of these programs, there exists little, high-quality evidence on the causal impact of CHWs on maternal and child health outcomes (Lewin et al., 2010). We propose to leverage detailed micro-data from over 100,000 households in Punjab, Pakistan in combination with a quasi-experimental change in CHW coverage. Punjab’s CHW program focuses on child and maternal health and has a wide reach in rural areas where access to other health care is limited. By exploiting the quasi-experimental change in coverage, we aim to address the following research questions: (1) How does CHW coverage affect health beliefs, behaviors, and maternal and child health outcomes?; (2) What are the medium-term effects on health outcomes for children exposed to CHW support in utero / in infancy?; and (3) How do effects evolve over time after a community loses access to a CHW? This project will provide robust evidence on the impact of Punjab’s CHW program and lay a strong foundation for future collaborations with the government to study the CHW program. More broadly, this study will provide critical evidence on the causal impact of CHWs on child and maternal well-being and their role in promoting global health equity. 


<h4>Days at Home among Children with Medical Complexity: Differences by Payer and Place of Residence in North Carolina</h4>
*with Caleb Easterly, Justin G. Trogdon, David Y. Ming, and Neal A. deJong*

**Background:** High care needs and fragmentation of medical care are a heavy burden on families caring for children with medical complexity (CMC). Time spent at home is a patient- and family-centered outcome measure that has been applied in postoperative, geriatric care, and end-of-life settings, but not to examine care quality among CMC.

**Objective:** To characterize “days at home” (DAH; days without a medical encounter) among publicly and privately insured CMC in North Carolina (NC) and to quantify variation between payers, differences between urban and rural areas, and variation across counties in North Carolina (NC).

**Design/Methods:** This retrospective cohort study used three years (2017-2019) of administrative claims data from NC Medicaid/Children’s Health Insurance Program and a large NC-based private insurer. We analyzed data at the beneficiary-year level and included observations if the beneficiary was aged 0-20 at the end of the calendar year and continuously enrolled for all 12 months. CMC were identified with the validated Pediatric Medical Complexity Algorithm (PMCA), version 3.2, which determines complexity using ICD-10 diagnosis codes. Annual DAH was calculated as 365 minus the number of days with any medical encounter as recorded in institutional or professional claims. We compared DAH between CMC with public and private insurance using a generalized linear model (GLM) adjusting for beneficiary age, age squared, sex, and rurality of residence. To assess spatial variation by payer, we estimated a GLM of days at home for CMC living in large metro, medium-small metro, and non-metropolitan areas interacted with payer, then visualized average DAH at the county level by payer.

**Results:** Of 1,631,011 unique beneficiaries aged 0-20 meeting continuous enrollment criteria, 221,624 (13.6%) were CMC. Privately insured CMC spent 30.7 more days at home than Medicaid-enrolled CMC after adjusting for age, age squared, sex, and rurality (336.9 vs. 306.3, p < 0.001). Medicaid-enrolled CMC living in non-metropolitan areas had higher DAH than Medicaid-enrolled CMC living in metropolitan areas (302.8, large metro; 306.2, medium/small metro; 309.5, non-metro; p < 0.001 for all differences), while privately insured CMC had more consistent DAH across urban-rural classifications. The county averages ranged from 290 to 334 DAH (Medicaid) and 319 to 351 DAH (private insurance). The difference between the two payers’ county averages ranged from 8 to 51 DAH. 

**Conclusion(s):** CMC enrolled in private insurance spent 10% more time at home than CMC enrolled in Medicaid, which may be due to differential medical needs, quality of care, or care coordination. Days at home vary across counties and, for Medicaid enrollees, between urban and rural areas.

